leanos: a short guide

The dock
  Notes     notes, saved to the SD card as you type (more under Notes below)
  Files     the files on the card; click one to read it (more under Files below)
  Terminal  commands; type help
  Settings  the background, the time zone, and the Raspberry Pi's speed and light
  Security  what every program's boot check found, and what is proved
  Apps      every program, built in or on the card, with its icon; click one to start it

The leanos menu
  Click the logo at the top left: Restart, or Shut down.

Windows
  Drag a window by its title bar. Its three buttons, at the top left:
  red       close it (a program with one window stops)
  yellow    minimize it: it leaves the screen, and its program keeps running; the dot
            under its icon in the dock turns amber. Click that icon (or `run` it again
            in Terminal) to bring it back, where it was, in front.
  green     zoom it: to the middle of the screen, in front; click again to put it back.
            Windows keep their size: a program draws its window at one size.
  Ctrl+O    the next window: the one in front goes to the back, and keys go to the one
            that comes to the front. Press it again to go through them all.
  The Window menu, in the menu bar after Edit, has Minimize, Zoom and Next window.

Copy and paste
  Ctrl+C    copy from the window in front (or Edit, Copy: Edit is in the menu bar,
            after the window's name)
  Ctrl+V    paste into the window in front (or Edit, Paste)

  What each program copies, and where a paste goes:
  Notes     the whole note (its first 4 KiB); a paste goes in at the cursor
  edit      the whole file (its first 4 KiB); a paste goes in at the cursor
  Terminal  the command line you are typing, or, when it is empty, what the last
            command printed; a paste goes onto the command line at the cursor, line
            breaks as spaces, so it never runs anything until you press Return
  Files     while you rename something, the name; a paste goes into the name
  Other programs do not answer a copy, and the clipboard stays as it was.

  Text moves between programs only by your hand. The display server keeps what you
  copy (up to 4 KiB of plain text, until leanos restarts). It asks the window in front
  for its text only when you press Ctrl+C, and takes the answer only from that window,
  within 2 seconds; it hands the text only to the window in front, when you press
  Ctrl+V. No program can read the clipboard, or put text on it, by asking.

  In the browser console, Ctrl+C, Ctrl+V and Ctrl+O are leanos's (Cmd+V on a Mac types the
  host's clipboard as keys). Under make run, your terminal's Ctrl+C stops QEMU itself.

Notes
  Each note is a file, notes/1.txt, notes/2.txt and so on, of up to 32 KiB.
  Arrows    move the cursor; Return starts a line, Backspace deletes before it
  Tab       go to the list: Up and Down choose a note, Return goes back to it
  Ctrl+N    a new note (the + button too)
  Ctrl+D    delete this note: it asks, and Ctrl+D again deletes it (or Delete twice)
  A note left empty goes when you choose another.

Files
  Click a file to read it; click a folder again (or press Return) to open it; Left goes
  back up. Keys, in either case:
  N         a new folder, "untitled folder" (the + Folder button too), named at once
  R         rename in place: type, then Return; Escape or a click elsewhere cancels.
            The name starts selected (a file's without its extension): typing replaces it.
            An empty name, a /, a name longer than 55 characters or one taken is refused.
  C         mark the selected file to copy (folders are not copied)
  X         mark the selected file or folder to move (a folder takes all in it along)
  V         put what is marked in the folder shown: a copy is "NAME copy" if the name is
            taken; a move never replaces anything
  Delete    delete the selected file or empty folder; a folder with things in it asks
            first, and Delete again deletes it and all in it
  Escape    forget what is marked (pressing C or X again on it does too)
  The mark is Files' own, not the clipboard. The status line says what is marked, what
  the keys do, and how much of the card is free.

Terminal
  ls, cat FILE, write FILE TEXT, rm FILE    files on the card (ls -a: icons too)
  mkdir FOLDER, cd FOLDER, cd .., pwd       folders
  mv FROM TO                                move or rename, in one step
  cp FROM TO                                copy a file (TO may be a folder)
  head, tail [-n N] FILE                    its first or last N lines (10 if not said)
  wc FILE                                   its lines, words and bytes
  grep [-i] TEXT FILE...                    the lines that hold TEXT (-i: in any case)
  find [FOLDER] [NAME]                      every file and folder under FOLDER, or those
                                            whose names hold NAME (16 folders down, 100
                                            names at most)
  df                                        the card's size, and what is used and free
  fill FILE KB CHAR, verify FILE            a big test file, and checking one
  ip, ping HOST, get http://URL [FILE]      the network (a USB network adapter)
  date, ntp [HOST]                          the time in your zone and UTC (set by ntp)
  run PROGRAM [FILE...]                     start a program from the card, giving it
                                            those files, 7 at most (and its own folder,
                                            apps/NAME)
  ps                                        every program slot, and what runs in it
  kill SLOT                                 stop a program from the card (10 to 15), answering or
                                            not, and take back the files it was given
  whoami, caps, boot, uptime                what the kernel says about this program
  tour                                      why leanos is harder to attack than Linux

  CMD > FILE    what CMD prints goes into FILE instead of the screen (echo TEXT > FILE
                makes a small file). The old FILE stays until the new one is whole: if
                the command fails or prints more than 64 KiB, nothing is written
  CMD >> FILE   the same, added at the end of FILE
  CMD | CMD2    what CMD prints becomes CMD2's input: grep, head, tail, wc and cat read
                it when they are given no file (ls | grep txt, cat big | grep x | wc,
                history | tail -n 5). As many | as fit on the line, and > at the end
  > and | work with spaces around them or not, and there are no quotes, so echo cannot
  print them. Errors, and notes such as "no match", still go to the screen. run, tour,
  kill, cd, exit and clear cannot be piped or redirected. Tab completes a command's name
  after a | too.

  fill, cp and > (and Files, when V puts a copy) make the new FILE in FILE.part~ and then
  put it in place in one step, so FILE is always its old self or the new one. A file
  FILE.part~ is taken to be one a power cut left behind, and is written over; a folder of
  that name is refused. A FILE.tmp of yours is never touched.

  Up, Down      the commands you ran before (the last 32; history lists them), and back to
                the line you were typing
  Left, Right   move along the command line; what you type goes in at the cursor
  Tab           complete a command's name, or a file or folder name (a folder gets a /);
                when several match, Tab completes what they share and a second Tab lists them

Programs on the card
  tour    the guided tour: each page really tries an attack
  calc    a calculator: type 2+3*4 and press Enter
  snake   the arrow keys steer; space plays again
  life    Conway's Game of Life; space pauses, a click adds a cell, r reseeds
  tiles   2048: the arrow keys slide the tiles
  clock   the time in your time zone (until a time server answers, how long the Pi has been
          up), a stopwatch and a timer: click a tab at the top, or press C, S or T.
          Stopwatch: space starts and stops it, L takes a lap, R resets it.
          Timer: type the time as on a microwave (1 3 0 is 1:30), or + and - for a minute
          more or less; space starts and pauses it, R resets it. At zero it flashes until a
          key or a click. Both keep going on the other tabs, and each has buttons too.
  hello   the smallest program
  fuzz    20,000 system calls with made-up arguments, each answer checked
  edit    a text editor: run edit FILE gives it that file; it saves by itself
  web     a text web browser: run -net web lets it use the network

Every program from the card runs in an open slot: it gets its own memory and a window,
and nothing else, whatever it was written to do. Up to six run at once.
